RAIL-TRAIN(1)
=============
:doctype: manpage
:man source: pz-compute
:man version: 0.2.0
:man manual: LineA pz-compute Manual
:revdate: September 2024

NAME
----
rail-train - Generate calibration file for photo-z estimation algorithms.

SYNOPSIS
--------
*rail-train* [_OPTION_]... [--] _input_ [_output_]

*rail-train* *-h*|*--help*

*rail-train* *--version*

DESCRIPTION
-----------
The *rail-train* program is a companion script to *rail-estimate*, used for
generating the calibration files required by the photometric redshift (PZ)
estimation algorithms. The *rail-train* prepares a ``pre-trained'' file for
certain algorithms used to compute PZ tables (for example, the calculated
weights for a neural network). *rail-train* receives an _input_ file containing
both the raw magnitude data and reference output redshifts, considered to be
correct and accurate. The _output_ file will be generated with the calibration
data specific to the estimator algorithm requested. Training is slow, but can be
done only once and used later with *rail-estimate* for any production data that
is expected to have the same behavior as the reference _input_ file.

The _input_ file may be a Parquet file, HDF5 file or any other format supported
by the LSST-DESC RAIL library. The program reads the input table, with lines
representing known objects in the sky with known magnitude and redshift values.
The calibration process (called the ``inform'' process in RAIL) is executed and
the _output_ file is generated as a Python pickle file with algorithm-specific
calibration data that may be used by *rail-estimate* to run an estimation on the
same _input_ file, producing accurate estimated redshift probability
distribution functions (PDFs) that mirror the reference redshift values.

The input must have a set of columns for magnitude data and magnitude errors, by
default following the templates ``mag_\{band}'' and ``magerr_\{band}'', where
the bands are the lower case letters representing the color bands ``u'', ``g'',
``r'', ``i'', ``z'' and ``y''. For hierachical input formats, the data must be,
by default, in the root section. The input table must also have a column called
``redshift'' representing the known redshift values.

The program supports multiple estimation algorithms to execute the calibration
and by default chooses the *fzboost* (FlexZBoost) algorithm. By default, the
_output_ file name is constructed from the template name
``estimator_\{algorithm}.pkl''.

Option arguments are used to modify the handling of the input file, the
calibration algorithm and the calibration parameters. If multiple options with
conflicting formats appear in the command line, the initial ones are ignored and
the last ones are used. The list of options follows:

*-a* _name_, **--algorithm=**_name_::
  Select estimation algorithm. The available algorithms are: *fzboost*
  (default), *bpz*, *tpz*, *gpz* and *lephare*. Algorithm availability depends
  on the presence of their respective add-on packages to the core RAIL
  framework. Note that the *bpz* algorithm might auto-generate cached data files
  the first time it runs and its default directory is the RAIL installation
  directory.

*-b* _bins_, **--bins=**_bins_::
  Set number of bins (columns) in the resulting tables. The default is 301. The
  *rail-train* program doesn't directly create the estimated redshift tables,
  but this parameter may be necessary for the calibration process too and it may
  be stored in the calibration file for later use during the estimation. This
  parameter is only meaningful for the algorithms that generate the redshift
  PDFs in the shape of a grid. Note: the number of bins may also be configured
  with a parameter file set with *-p*. If present in the file, the parameter
  will have priority over this option.

*-g* _group_, **--group=**_group_::
  For HDF5 input, sets the group name (section) where input data is stored. By
  default, the root group is used.

*-p* _file_, **--param-file=**_file_::
  Extra parameter file for the calibration algorithm. Individual algorithms may
  have a large amount of parameters. This option should be used to provide a
  YAML file containing a top-level dictionary with the parameters that should be
  modified from their default values. The *rail-train* program doesn't
  configure most algorithm parameters, relying on the defaults provided by the
  algorithms themselves. The exceptions are the number of bins, configured with
  the *-b* option and the *nondetect_val* parameter, which is set by default to
  *NaN* for the *tpz* algorithm. Source distributions of *rail-train* contain
  example parameter files with all the default values for certain source code
  snapshots of the estimation algorithms. If any command-line options and
  parameters in the parameter file refer to the same parameter, the ones in the
  parameter file have priority.

**--column-template=**_template_::
  Set the names of the input columns. This is a template text, by default
  ``mag_\{band}''. The color bands required are ``u'', ``g'', ``r'', ``i'',
  ``z'' and ``y'', so, for example, when setting this option to
  ``\{band}magnitue'', it will require the columns ``umagnitude'',
  ``gmagnitude'', ``rmagnitude'', etc. present in the input file.

**--column-template-error=**_template-error_::
  Set the names of the input error columns. This is a template text, by default
  ``magerr_\{band}''. The color bands required are ``u'', ``g'', ``r'', ``i'',
  ``z'' and ``y'', so, for example, when setting this option to
  ``\{band}error'', it will require the columns ``uerror'', ``gerror'',
  ``rerror'', etc. present in the input file.

*-h*, *--help*::
  Show help message instead of executing an estimation.

*--version*::
  Show program version number instead of executing an estimation.

EXAMPLES
--------
Execute a calibration using all the defaults: *fzboost* algorithm, input with
the ``mag_\{band}'' and ``magerr_\{band}'' columns, generate the calibration
file ``estimator_fzboost.pkl'', for estimating with 301 bins, all other defaults
inherited from *fzboost*:

    $ rail-train reference1.pq

Execute a calibration using a different algorithm (*tpz*) and output name:

    $ rail-train -a tpz input1.pq tpz-calib1.pkl

Change the input file's column names and group to estimate the example file
provided by the RAIL source distribution:

    $ rail-train --group=photometry --column-template=mag_\{band}_lsst \
                    --column-template-error=mag_err_\{band}_lsst \
                    test_dc2_training_9816.hdf5 fzboost-calib1.pkl

Provide a custom algorithm configuration and generate the ``estimator_bpz.pkl''
file:

    $ rail-train -a bpz -p custom-bpz.yaml input1.hdf5

Example configuration file for the *bpz* algorithm (use it with *-p*):

    data_path: "None"
    columns_file: "test_bpz.columns"
    spectra_file: "CWWSB4.list"
    m0: 20.0
    nt_array: [1, 2, 3]
    mmin: 18.0
    mmax: 29.0
    init_kt: 0.3
    init_zo: 0.4
    init_alpha: 1.8
    init_km: 0.1
    type_file: ""
    zmin: 0.0
    zmax: 3.0
    nzbins: 301
    nondetect_val: 99.0

EXIT STATUS
-----------
*0*::
  Success.

*1*::
  Failure.

FILES
-----
'estimator_\{algorithm}.pkl', '$XDG_DATA_HOME/rail_scripts/estimator_\{algorithm}.pkl'::
  The default file name template for the calibration files.

'$XDG_DATA_HOME/rail_scripts/algorithms_config'::
  The directory with example parameter files.


COPYRIGHT
---------
Copyright Â© 2024 LIneA IT. Licence MIT.

SEE ALSO
--------
*rail-estimate*(1)

A quick start tutorial document is also available in the source distribution:
'doc/rail-estimate-getting-started.md'.
